



Network Working Group                                         C. Bonnell
Internet-Draft                                            DigiCert, Inc.
Intended status: Informational                                   J. Gray
Expires: 18 November 2023                                        Entrust
                                                                 D. Hook
                                                               KeyFactor
                                                                T. Okubo
                                                          DigiCert, Inc.
                                                            M. Ounsworth
                                                                 Entrust
                                                             17 May 2023


      A Mechanism for Encoding Differences in Paired Certificates
                   draft-lamps-chameleon-certs-latest

Abstract

   This document specifies a method to efficiently convey the
   differences between two certificates in an X.509 version 3 extension.
   This method allows a relying party to extract information sufficient
   to construct the paired certificate and perform certification path
   validation using the constructed certificate.  In particular, this
   method is especially useful as part of a key or signature algorithm
   migration, where subjects may be issued multiple certificates
   containing different public keys or signed with different CA private
   keys or signature algorithms.  This method does not require any
   changes to the certification path algorithm as described in
   [RFC5280].  Additionally, this method does not violate the
   constraints of serial number uniqueness for certificates issued by a
   single certification authority.

About This Document

   This note is to be removed before publishing as an RFC.

   The latest revision of this draft can be found at
   https://CBonnell.github.io/chameleon-certs/draft-lamps-chameleon-
   certs.html.  Status information for this document may be found at
   https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/draft-lamps-chameleon-certs/.

   Source for this draft and an issue tracker can be found at
   https://github.com/CBonnell/chameleon-certs.

Status of This Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at https://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on 18 November 2023.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2023 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents (https://trustee.ietf.org/
   license-info) in effect on the date of publication of this document.
   Please review these documents carefully, as they describe your rights
   and restrictions with respect to this document.  Code Components
   extracted from this document must include Revised BSD License text as
   described in Section 4.e of the Trust Legal Provisions and are
   provided without warranty as described in the Revised BSD License.

Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction
   2.  Conventions and Definitions
     2.1.  Definitions
   3.  Relationship between Base Certificates and Delta Certificates
   4.  Delta certificate descriptor extension
     4.1.  Delta certificate descriptor content
     4.2.  Issuing a Base Certificate
     4.3.  Reconstructing a Delta Certificate from a Base Certificate
   5.  Delta certificate request content and semantics
     5.1.  Creating a certification signing request for Paired
           Certificates
   6.  Security Considerations
   7.  IANA Considerations
   8.  Normative References
   Acknowledgments
   Authors' Addresses

1.  Introduction

   In certain public key infrastructures, it is common to issue multiple
   certificates to a single subject.  In particular, as part of an
   algorithm migration, multiple certificates may be issued to a single
   subject which convey public keys of different types or are signed
   with different signature algorithms.  In cases where relying party
   systems cannot be immediately updated to support new algorithms, it
   is useful to issue certificates to subjects that convey public keys
   whose algorithm is being phased out to maintain interoperability.
   However, multiple certificates adds complexity to certificate
   management and exposes limitations in applications and protocols that
   support a single certificate chain.  For this reason, it is useful to
   efficiently convey information concerning the elements of two
   certificates within a single certificate.  This information can then
   be used to construct the paired certificate as needed by relying
   parties.

   This document specifies an X.509 v3 certificate extension that
   includes sufficient information for a relying party to construct both
   paired certificates with a single certificate.  Additionally, this
   document specifies two PKCS #10 Certification Signing Request
   attributes that can be used by applicants to request Paired
   Certificates using a single PKCS #10 Certification Signing Request.

2.  Conventions and Definitions

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "NOT RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and
   "OPTIONAL" in this document are to be interpreted as described in
   BCP 14 [RFC2119] [RFC8174] when, and only when, they appear in all
   capitals, as shown here.

2.1.  Definitions

   For conciseness, this document defines several terms that are
   frequently used throughout.

   Base Certificate: A X.509 v3 certificate which contains a delta
   certificate descriptor extension.

   DCD: An acronym meaning "Delta Certificate descriptor", which is a
   reference to the X.509 v3 certificate extension defined in this
   document.

   Delta Certificate: A X.509 v3 certificate which can be reconstructed
   by incorporating the fields and extensions contained in a Base
   Certificate.

   Paired Certificates: A Base Certificate and the corresponding Delta
   Certificate whose information is encoded in the Base Certificate's
   DCD extension.

3.  Relationship between Base Certificates and Delta Certificates

   In some public key infrastructures, it may be common to issue
   multiple certificates to the same subject.  These certificates
   generally contain the same (or substantially similar) identity
   information and generally have identical validity periods.  The
   differences in certificate content generally stem from the
   certification of different keys, where the named subject may have
   multiple keys of different algorithms certified by separate
   certificates.  The use of different keys allows for the subject to
   use the key that is most appropriate for a given operation and
   intended recipient.  For example, as part of an ongoing algorithm
   migration, it is useful to use stronger algorithms when both of the
   systems utilized by the subscriber/sender and recipient have been
   upgraded.  However, in the case where systems have not yet been
   updated, the use of a legacy key algorithm may be required.
   Additionally, multiple certificates may be issued to the same subject
   that certify keys for different purposes, such as one key for signing
   and another key for encryption.

   The management of multiple certificates may be complex, and there may
   be limitations in protocols regarding the handling of multiple
   certificate chains.  To account for these concerns, this document
   proposes a method to efficiently encode the differences between two
   certificates with sufficient information such that a relying party
   can derive the complete certificate from another.  For the purposes
   of this document, the "Base Certificate" contains its own fields and
   extensions and additionally includes an extension that conveys all
   differences contained within the paired certificate.  The certificate
   whose elements which differ from the Base Certificate and are
   captured in the Delta Certificate descriptor extension of the Base
   Certificate is known as the "Delta Certificate".

   Delta Certificates are reconstructed from the Base Certificate either
   on the sender's side or the recipient's side depending on the
   protocol and application(s) in use.  The sender may elect to send the
   Base Certificate or the Delta Certificate based on information that
   it has about what the recipient can process.  Similarly, the client
   may send either the Base Certificate or the Delta Certificate based
   on what the server can process.  This assures backwards compatibility
   as the certificate sent to the peer (server or client) is chosen
   based on what it can process.  The negotiation on which certificate
   to use is out-of-scope of this document and is deferred to each
   protocol and application.

   In the absence of information concerning the capabilities of the
   peer, it is unknown whether it understands the DCD extension in the
   Base Certificate.  When the recipient does not understand the DCD
   extension, it only processes the information within the Base
   Certificate and ignores the information found in a non-critical DCD
   extension.  If the recipient receives a Base Certificate and is
   capable of processing the DCD extension, then it may reconstruct the
   Delta Certificate to be used for processing.

   In a protocol, the sender may perform a cryptographic operation with
   the key conveyed within the Base Certificate.  If it understands the
   DCD extension, then it may reconstruct the Delta Certificate and
   choose to perform the same operation with the key conveyed within the
   DCD extension.  This behavior is deferred to the software in use.

4.  Delta certificate descriptor extension

   The Delta Certificate descriptor ("DCD") extension is used to
   reconstruct the Delta Certificate by incorporating both the fields
   and extensions present in the Base Certificate as well as the
   information contained within the extension itself.

   Certification authorities SHOULD NOT mark this extension as critical
   so that applications that do not understand the extension will still
   be able to process the Base Certificate.

4.1.  Delta certificate descriptor content

   The DCD extension is identified with the following object identifier:

   (TODO: replace this temporary OID) ~~~ id-ce-delta-certificate-
   descriptor ::= OBJECT IDENTIFIER { joint-iso-itu-t(2) country(16)
   us(840) organization(1) entrust(114027) 80 6 1 } ~~~

   The ASN.1 syntax of the extension is as follows:

   DeltaCertificateDescriptor ::= SEQUENCE {
     serialNumber          CertificateSerialNumber,
     signature             [0] IMPLICIT AlgorithmIdentifier OPTIONAL,
     issuer                [1] IMPLICIT Name OPTIONAL,
     validity              [2] IMPLICIT Validity OPTIONAL,
     subject               [3] IMPLICIT Name OPTIONAL,
     subjectPublicKeyInfo  SubjectPublicKeyInfo,
     extensions            [4] IMPLICIT Extensions OPTIONAL,
     signatureValue        BIT STRING
   }

   The serialNumber field MUST be present and contain the serial number
   of the Delta Certificate.

   If present, the signature field specifies the signature algorithm
   used by the issuing certification authority to sign the Delta
   Certificate.  If the signature field is absent, then the value of the
   signature field of the Base Certificate and Delta Certificate is
   equal.

   If present, the issuer field specifies the distinguished name of the
   issuing certification authority which signed the Delta Certificate.
   If the issuer field is absent, then the distinguished name of the
   issuing certification authority for both the Base Certificate and
   Delta Certificate is the same.

   If present, the validity field specifies the validity period of the
   Delta Certificate.  If the validity field is absent, then the
   validity period of both the Base Certificate and Delta Certificate is
   the same.

   If present, the subject field specifies the distinguished name of the
   named subject as encoded in the Delta Certificate.  If the subject
   field is absent, then the distinguished name of the named subject for
   both the Base Certificate and Delta Certificate is the same.

   The subjectPublicKeyInfo field contains the public key included in
   the Delta Certificate.  The value of this field MUST differ from the
   value of the subjectPublicKeyInfo field of the Base Certificate.  In
   other words, the Base Certificate and Delta Certificate MUST certify
   different keys.

   If present, the extensions field contains the extensions whose
   criticality and/or value are different in the Delta Certificate
   compared to the Base Certificate.  If the extensions field is absent,
   then all extensions in the Delta Certificate MUST have the same
   criticality and value as the Base Certificate.  This field MUST NOT
   contain any extension types which do not appear in the Base
   Certificate.  Additionally, the Base Certificate SHALL NOT include
   any extensions which are not included in the Delta Certificate, with
   the exception of the DCD extension itself.  Therefore, it is not
   possible to add or remove extensions using the DCD extension.  The
   ordering of extensions in this field MUST be relative to the ordering
   of the extensions as they are encoded in the Delta Certificate.
   Maintaining this relative ordering ensures that the Delta
   Certificate's extensions can be constructed with a single pass.

   The signatureValue field contains the value of the signature field of
   the Delta Certificate.  It MUST be present.

4.2.  Issuing a Base Certificate

   The signature of the Delta Certificate must be known so that its
   value can be included in the signatureValue field of the delta
   certificate descriptor extension.  Given this, Delta Certificate will
   necessarily need to be issued prior to the issuance of the Base
   Certificate.

   After the Delta Certificate is issued, the certification authority
   compares the signature, issuer, validity, subject,
   subjectPublicKeyInfo, and extensions fields of the Delta Certificate
   and the to-be-signed certificate which will contain the DCD
   extension.  The certification authority then populates the DCD
   extension with the values of the fields which differ from the Base
   Certificate.  The CA MUST encode extensions in the Base Certificate
   in the same order used for the Delta Certificate, with the exception
   of the DCD extension itself.

   The certification authority then adds the computed DCD extension to
   the to-be-signed Base Certificate and signs the Base Certificate.

4.3.  Reconstructing a Delta Certificate from a Base Certificate

   The following procedure describes how to reconstruct a Delta
   Certificate from a Base Certificate:

   1.  Create an initial Delta Certificate template by copying the Base
       Certificate excluding the DCD extension.

   2.  Replace the value of the serialNumber field of the Delta
       Certificate template with the value of the DCD extension's
       serialNumber field.

   3.  If the DCD extension contains a value for the signature field,
       then replace the value of the signature field of the Delta
       Certificate template with the value of the DCD extension's
       signature field.

   4.  If the DCD extension contains a value for the issuer field, then
       replace the value of the issuer field of the Delta Certificate
       template with the value of the DCD extension's issuer field.

   5.  If the DCD extension contains a value for the validity field,
       then replace the value of the validity field of the Delta
       Certificate template with the value of the DCD extension's
       validity field.

   6.  Replace the value of the subjectPublicKeyInfo field of the Delta
       Certificate template with the value of the DCD extension's
       subjectPublicKeyInfo field.

   7.  If the DCD extension contains a value for the subject field, then
       replace the value of the subject field of the Delta Certificate
       template with the value of the DCD extension's subject field.

   8.  If the DCD extension contains a value for the extensions field,
       then iterate over the DCD extension's "extensions" field,
       replacing the criticality and/or extension value of each
       identified extension in the Delta Certificate template.  If any
       extension is present in the field that does not appear in the
       Delta Certificate template, then this reconstruction process MUST
       fail.

   9.  Replace the value of the signature field of the Delta Certificate
       template with the value of the DCD extension's signatureValue
       field.

5.  Delta certificate request content and semantics

   Using the two attributes that are defined below, it is possible to
   create Certification Signing Requests for both Base and Delta
   Certificates within a single PKCS #10 Certificate Signing Request.

   The delta certificate request attribute is used to convey the
   requested differences between the request for issuance of the Base
   Certificate and the requested Delta Certificate.

   The attribute is identified with the following object identifier:

   (TODO: replace this temporary OID)

   id-at-delta-certificate-request ::= OBJECT IDENTIFIER {
      joint-iso-itu-t(2) country(16) us(840) organization(1)
      entrust(114027) 80 6 2
   }

   The ASN.1 syntax of the attribute is as follows:

   DeltaCertificateRequest ::= SEQUENCE {
     subject               [0] IMPLICIT Name OPTIONAL,
     subjectPKInfo         SubjectPublicKeyInfo,
     extensions            [1] IMPLICIT Extensions OPTIONAL,
     signatureAlgorithm    [2] IMPLICIT AlgorithmIdentifier OPTIONAL,
   }

   deltaCertificateRequest ATTRIBUTE ::= {
      WITH SYNTAX DeltaCertificateRequest
      SINGLE VALUE TRUE
      ID id-at-delta-certificate-request
   }

   The delta certificate request signature attribute is used to convey
   the signature that is calculated over the CertificationRequestInfo
   using the signature algorithm and key that is specified in the delta
   certificate request attribute.  Section 5.1 describes in detail how
   to determine the value of this attribute.

   This attribute is identified with the following object identifier:

   (TODO: replace this temporary OID)

   id-at-delta-certificate-request-signature ::= OBJECT IDENTIFIER {
      joint-iso-itu-t(2) country(16) us(840) organization(1)
      entrust(114027) 80 6 3
   }

   The ASN.1 syntax of the attribute is as follows:

   DeltaCertificateRequestSignature ::= BIT STRING

   deltaCertificateRequestSignature ATTRIBUTE ::= {
      WITH SYNTAX DeltaCertificateRequestSignature
      SINGLE VALUE TRUE
      ID id-at-delta-certificate-request-signature
   }

5.1.  Creating a certification signing request for Paired Certificates

   The following procedure is used by certificate requestors to create a
   combined certification signing request for Paired Certificates.

   1.  The certificate requestor creates a CertificationRequestInfo
       containing the subject, subjectPKInfo, and attributes for the
       Base Certificate.

   2.  The certificate requestor creates a delta certificate request
       attribute that specifies the requested differences between the
       to-be-issued Base Certificate and Delta Certificate requests.

   3.  The certificate requestor adds the delta certificate request
       attribute that was created by step 2 to the list of attributes in
       the CertificationRequestInfo.

   4.  The certificate requestor signs the CertificationRequestInfo
       using the private key of the Delta certificate request subject.

   5.  The certificate requestor creates a delta certificate request
       signature attribute that contains the signature value calculated
       by step 4.

   6.  The certificate requestor adds the delta certificate request
       signature attribute that was created by step 5 to the list of
       attributes.

   7.  The certificate requestor signs the CertificationRequestInfo
       using the private key of the Base certificate request subject.

6.  Security Considerations

   The validation of Base Certificates and Delta Certificates follows
   the certification path validation algorithm defined in [RFC5280].
   However, there are some additional considerations for the software to
   handle the Base Certificate and Delta Certificate.  The Base
   Certificate and Delta Certificate may have different security
   properties such as different signing algorithms, different key types
   or the same key types with different key sizes or signing algorithms.
   The preference on which certificate to be used or using both when
   available is deferred to the server or client software.

   The software is expected to make choices depending on the
   certificate's security properties or a policy set for the particular
   PKI.  One example of handling two certificates is "fallback" where if
   the validation of the first certificate fails, it attempts to
   validate the second certificate.  Another example to handle two
   certificate is "upgrade", where the validation of the first
   certificate succeeds but still attempts the validation of the second
   certificate.  While this document provides a vehicle to convey
   information of two certificates in one, it does not address the rules
   that are expected to be set by the policy of a PKI on how to issue
   Paired Certificates and how to handle them.

   The algorithms that are used for the Base Certificate and Delta
   Certificate respectively should be carefully set by the policy of
   each PKI reflecting the best current practices in usage of
   cryptography.  The behavior of the server or client software is
   expected to be well-defined in accordance with the policy in order to
   avoid downgrade attacks or substitution attacks.

7.  IANA Considerations

   For the Delta Certificate descriptor extension as defined in
   Section 4.1, IANA is requested to assign an object identifier (OID)
   for the certificate extension.  The OID for the certificate extension
   should be allocated in the "SMI Security for PKIX Certificate
   Extension" registry (1.3.6.1.5.5.7.1).

   For the Delta Certificate Request and Delta Certificate Request
   Signature attributes as defined in Section 5, IANA is requested to
   create a new registry under SMI Security Codes and assign two object
   identifiers (OID).

   For the ASN.1 Module for the extension and attributes defined in this
   document, IANA is requested to assign an object identifier (OID).
   The OID for the module should be allocated in the "SMI Security for
   PKIX Module Identifier" registry (1.3.6.1.5.5.7.0).

8.  Normative References

   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC2119, March 1997,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc2119>.

   [RFC5280]  Cooper, D., Santesson, S., Farrell, S., Boeyen, S.,
              Housley, R., and W. Polk, "Internet X.509 Public Key
              Infrastructure Certificate and Certificate Revocation List
              (CRL) Profile", RFC 5280, DOI 10.17487/RFC5280, May 2008,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc5280>.

   [RFC8174]  Leiba, B., "Ambiguity of Uppercase vs Lowercase in RFC
              2119 Key Words", BCP 14, RFC 8174, DOI 10.17487/RFC8174,
              May 2017, <https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc8174>.

Acknowledgments

   TODO acknowledge.

Authors' Addresses

   C. Bonnell
   DigiCert, Inc.
   Email: corey.bonnell@digicert.com


   J. Gray
   Entrust
   Email: john.gray@entrust.com


   D. Hook
   KeyFactor
   Email: david.hook@keyfactor.com


   T. Okubo
   DigiCert, Inc.
   Email: tomofumi.okubo@digicert.com


   M. Ounsworth
   Entrust
   Email: mike.ounsworth@entrust.com
